In this section,
we will learn
about console-based text editors in Linux.
In one of the previous chapters,
we saw the usage of the cat command
to read and write data into a file.
While this works well and has its uses,
it is very basic
and offers no additional features.
Besides, it is not feasible to use cat
when dealing with large amounts of text
or for writing code.
This is why we use text editors.
While there are several options available,
we will be focusing on the vi editor,
which is perhaps
the most popular text editor used in Linux.
The vi editor is available
in almost all Linux distributions
out of the box.
The command to open the editor is vi
followed by the name of the file
you want to create or edit.
In this case,
we are opening an existing file
in Michael's home directory
by running vi /home/michael/sample.txt.
As soon as you issue this command,
the vi editor opens the file
and prints the contents,
if any.
The vi editor has three operation modes,
the command mode,
insert mode,
and the last line mode.
When the editor opens a file,
as in this example,
it always goes to the command mode first.
In this mode,
the editor only understands commands.
Let's learn how to navigate
between the three operation modes.
We now know that when you open a file,
you will be in the command mode by default.
In this mode,
you can issue commands to the editor,
such as copy, paste,
or delete a line or a word.
You can also navigate between lines.
We will see the different options
and operations available in this mode in a bit.
To switch from command mode to insert mode,
type lowercase, i.
This mode allows you
to write text into the file.
Once you are done editing the file,
to switch back to command mode
hit the Escape button
from the command mode.
Pressing the colon key
takes you to the last line mode.
In this mode,
you can choose to save changes to the file,
discard changes
or save and edit.
From the last line mode,
hit the Escape key to get back
to the command mode.
Use the same sequence
to go back to any of the modes.
While going into the insert mode
from command mode,
you may use other options,
such as lowercase a or o,
or uppercase I, A, or O.
Let's now check out the command mode.
There are lots of tasks
that can be carried out from this mode.
We will look at some of the commonly used ones.
The command mode
allows using the mouse cursor to highlight,
copy, paste,
or move texts.
Once you are in this mode,
you will see a cursor
that you can use to move around the file
using the directional keys on the keyboard.
Alternatively,
you can use the keys,
K, J, H, L.
K to go up,
H to the left,
J to go down,
and L to the right.
You can also use the mouse
to highlight text and use right-click
to copy the highlighted section.
To copy a line,
move the cursor to the intended line
and issue the yy command.
To paste the copied line,
move the cursor above the line,
where you want to paste
and press the P key.
To save the file,
use uppercase Z, Z.
To delete a letter,
move the cursor to the intended location
and type X.
To delete a line,
move the cursor to any location on that line
and type dd.
To delete three lines from the current line,
issue the command d3d.
Replace the number three with any number
to delete that many lines
from the current line.
Suppose you made a mistake,
to undo the previous change, type U.
To redo the change again,
press the Ctrl R key.
To find a string,
use either the slash or question mark key
followed by the pattern you want to search.
The slash
followed by the pattern
searches the file
from the current line downwards
until it finds the matches.
For example,
to find the location of the pattern
called "line," in this example file,
type in "/line,"
the cursor will be moved
to the first occurrence of the line.
To find the next occurrence down the file,
press lower case n.
To find the pattern above the current line,
key in uppercase N.
The question mark pattern
does the same thing, but in reverse,
it searches for the pattern from the cursor
and moves upwards to find the next match.
Using lowercase n will move up
to find the next match,
and uppercase N searches down the file.
The insert mode is used to insert
or write data to the file.
To get into insert mode from command mode,
key in lowercase i,
lowercase a, o,
or uppercase A.
Once you are in this mode,
you will see a blinking cursor
marking the location on the file
where you can make changes.
At the bottom of the screen,
there should be the word "insert"
indicating that you are, in fact,
in insert mode.
You can now use the arrow keys
to move the cursor in the file
and make use of the Enter and Backspace keys
as you would in graphical text editors,
such as the Notepad in Windows.
You can enter the last line mode
from command mode
by typing the colon key.
From this mode,
you can save or discard changes
made to the file.
To save a file after making a change,
type in ":w".
This will save the file,
but you will still be within the editor.
To exit the file, use ":q".
To save and exit from the vi editor,
type in ":wq".
If you want to exit the file
without saving the changes you have made
since the last save,
use the ":q!".
What we have seen so far is the vi editor.
There is another popular program called VIM,
which is an improved version of vi
with added features,
but very similar in appearance to vi.
All the concepts we discussed so far with vi
apply to VIM as well,
and should help you get started on VIM
should you want to do so.
It is also important to note
that in most distros today,
the vi is a symbolic link
or a shortcut to the VIM editor.
For example, here,
the vi program is pointing
to /usr/bin/vim.basic file.
To see the differences between vi and VIM,
use man pages or check within VIM.
Open a file using VIM
by running VIM followed by the file name,
and then type in ":hvi-differences".
Now that you are familiar with vi editor,
head over to the hands-on labs
and start practicing.